[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: And
welcome to Beyond Belief.
We've got a great
program for you tonight.
Thomas Hatsis with us,
a psychedelic historian,
a public speaker, an author
of four books, a former--
believe it or not--
roller derby gold medalist
and, along with partner
Eden Woodruff, runs the
Psanctum Psychedelia,
a psychedelics harm
reduction and education
group in Portland, Oregon.
Tom, welcome to the program.
>>THOMAS HATSIS: Thanks
for having me, Mr. Noory.
>>NOORY: Tell me
about your background.
How did you get into this?
>>HATSIS: Into
psychedelic research?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>HATSIS: Well, it started
off by being really terrible
at math.
So I decided to study
history instead.
>>NOORY: Aha
>>HATSIS: And--
>>NOORY: Smart move.
>>HATSIS: Yes.
[LAUGHS] I was smart
enough to know better.
And so I just--
I started-- I had an interest
in various indigenous
tribes and their cultures
during my teen years.
And that's when I first stumbled
across things like peyote
and magic mushrooms.
And I just really
had this desire
to study the spiritual aspect of
what these plant medicines were
doing for people.
>>NOORY: Is ayahuasca
put in that category too?
>>HATSIS: Oh absolutely,
>>NOORY: It is.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, although I
hadn't heard of ayahuasca
yet as a kid.
But yeah, ayahuasca is
definitely a fantastic plant
medicine.
>>NOORY: And these indigenous
Native Americans, I assume,
were all over the
country, weren't they,
not just one geographic area?
>>HATSIS: Oh sure, yes, mostly
in today, we would call Mexico.
They were pretty much
spread all throughout Mexico
and in South America.
That's where you get a lot
of the ayahuasca shamanism.
>>NOORY: There is a word called
entheogen. What does that mean?
>>HATSIS: Entheogen is
coined by Carl Ruck,
and it means to generate
divinity from within.
It's based off of an
ancient Greek word
enthusiasmos, which means
to have a religious ecstasy.
Whereas that religious
ecstasy with enthusiasmos
can include a plant
medicine or not,
the word entheogen specifically
includes a plant medicine.
>>NOORY: Do these
plant medicines
give people a false
sense of something else,
something hallucinogenic that
may be happening or may not be?
>>HATSIS: It is my
belief that they do not,
especially if taken
in a sacred context.
The way I see it is if you
give ayahuasca to 100 people,
and all 100 of those
people come back
saying that they just
spoke to the mother--
with the mother of the universe,
as far as I'm concerned,
that is scientific
proof right there,
because you've-- it's
experiential proof.
100 times and everyone
is coming back
saying that they've had
this similar experience?
I don't think that's
a hallucination.
I think people are
piercing the veil.
There are so many
dimensions out there,
and I believe that these
plant medicines are here
to help us pierce that veil.
>>NOORY: My first
wording of psychedelics
came when the Beatles
went from what
they were to the
more psychedelic end
of their careers.
That's when I started
realizing, what is this?
This is strange.
They were dealing with all
these gurus, plants, and things
like that.
And they got into that.
How safe is it for people,
Tom, who don't understand it?
I can't go out and pick
a mushroom and eat it.
I'd probably choke
or poison myself.
>>HATSIS: It's not
very safe at all
if you don't know what you're
doing one of the things
that my group sanctum
psychedelia does
is educate people, especially
with things like mushrooms,
what mushrooms.
Because people are
going to go pick them,
and we want to make
sure that people
stay safe by at
least giving them
some kind of identification
of what to be looking for.
But we say that with the caveat
to-- don't go out and pick
your own mushrooms, and to
definitely learn everything
you can about something before
you put it in your body.
>>NOORY: What makes one mushroom
poisonous and another one not?
>>HATSIS: Well,
the one that is not
poisonous will have
psilocybin in it.
At least a psychedelic one will.
It's the same thing like,
what's the difference when
a poisonous mushroom
and a gourmet mushroom?
Well, the poisonous
mushroom's going to kill you,
and the gourmet one tastes
great on a hamburger.
>>NOORY: Yet they
look the same--
>>HATSIS: Yes, well there are--
>>NOORY: To most people.
>>HATSIS: There are
subtle differences.
Yeah, to the untrained eye,
they do look very much the same.
But to people like--
I go mushroom picking
every fall with my partner.
We can identify the safe ones.
And we don't just
get the fun ones.
We get gourmet ones as
well, medicinal ones.
>>NOORY: So you
know, when you're out
looking at mushrooms, you know
what's good and what's bad.
>>HATSIS: Yes, by and large.
I don't--
>>NOORY: Is that
training, trial and error?
>>HATSIS: Oh no,
I'm very fortunate.
I have a really good friend
who is a master forager who
has been foraging
not just mushrooms,
but all kinds of
berries, wild shrubs,
things like that
you could just eat
who's just an
absolute encyclopedia
of the natural world.
>>NOORY: And you would
trust that person's opinion
on the spot?
>>HATSIS: Oh,
absolutely, absolutely.
>>NOORY: If they said,
grab this mushroom
and take a bite out
of it, you would.
>>HATSIS: Well,
nobody would ever
say to eat a fresh mushroom.
You'd have to dry them.
But yeah, with that, yeah.
I would definitely
trust them and eat it.
>>NOORY: Some of them,
the gourmet mushrooms,
are pretty darn
expensive, aren't they?
>>HATSIS: Oh yeah.
>>NOORY: How come?
>>HATSIS: Because
people like them.
They taste so good.
It's simple-- it's
markets, really.
If enough people
want morels, they're
going to jack up the price.
>>NOORY: Absolutely And
the cheaper mushrooms
are the snow caps
and things like that?
>>HATSIS: Sure, yeah, yeah.
Even portobellos, I think,
are on the cheaper side,
although in grocery
stores, they're
marked up more than they
should be, in my opinion.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
Now, this entheogenic experience
that you just talked about,
Tom, goes way back
into human history.
How far back?
>>HATSIS: Wow.
We could go all the way to
the Paleolithic Age with this
if we believe Terence McKenna's,
what he called the stoned ape
theory, where he believes that
different primates were just
foraging around, and some
stumbled upon mushrooms
and ate them, and this started
to help their minds grow.
Now, I personally don't actually
buy the Stone Ape Theory.
I think there are
better explanations
for human evolution--
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>HATSIS: --than
eating mushrooms.
But if we take the
stoned ape theory
and bring it up a few hundred
years into the future,
into the Mesolithic
Period, that's
when we start to see
examples of entheogenic art,
carvings, cave drawings
as well, tapestries.
We have an image found in
a Xiongnu woman's grave
that's this tapestry that shows
this worship of a mushroom.
Now, that's pretty significant,
because most tapestries don't
survive the ruins of time.
And here we have this
one that did that clearly
shows these people.
We don't know what they
were doing with it,
but they're certainly
holding this mushroom
in this reverential pose.
>>NOORY: There are
lots of descriptions
of mushrooms in ancient
paintings and things like that.
They're all over the place.
I had heard years
ago that the image
of Santa Claus in his big
red outfit was a mushroom.
Is that possible?
>>HATSIS: Believe it or
not, it's not possible.
One of the things that
I do in my research
is actually go back
and check, not just--
>>NOORY: Had you
heard that story too?
>>HATSIS: I used to
believe that story.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>HATSIS: Absolutely,
and it was my turn
to ruin Christmas dinner
for my conservative uncle
by saying Santa
Claus was a mushroom.
But no, I-- the
indiscretion of youth.
I was wrong about that.
Santa's outfit-- you mentioned
the red and white of his
outfit--
it actually went through
a variety of changes
before, really, Coca-Cola
settled on the red and white.
It was more marketing
for Coca-Cola
than anything to
do with a mushroom.
>>NOORY: Now,
that's a good point.
>>HATSIS: And
actually, in my book,
"Psychedelic
Mystery Traditions,"
I deconstruct the entire Santa
Claus mushroom mythology.
>>NOORY: We've
got four pictures.
I want to take a
look at each one
as you tell us a
little bit about what
we're looking at here.
What is this?
>>HATSIS: So this
is the tapestry
from the Xiongnu woman's grave.
And here we have
these two figures.
This gentleman
here is holding up
this mushroom to this person.
Either this guy's checking
it out-- we really
don't know what they're doing.
But it's clearly a
mushroom in his hands.
It's a huge mushroom.
>>NOORY: Yeah, it's a huge--
>>HATSIS: Perhaps even
the Amanita muscaria,
just because of its size.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
And that's edible?
>>HATSIS: Yeah,
that's very edible.
It's also, if you're a Smurf,
you can make a house out of it.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
What our next--
now, what is this?
>>HATSIS: So this
is the poppy goddess
from the ancient Mediterranean.
She's found all over the place.
She went by many
different names.
In Greece, she was
known as Demeter.
In Egypt, she was called Isis.
In Sumer, she was called Inanna.
In Thrace or Anatolia
or modern day Turkey,
she was known as Ceres.
We actually get the
word cereal from Ceres.
But yeah, this was a--
this is pretty common.
People were using things like
opium for medical reasons,
not so much for their euphoric
and painkilling effects,
although those were absolutely
recognized and enjoyed.
>>NOORY: It was a painkiller.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, as a painkiller.
But what they were
actually using them for
was as a vector to send
you beyond the veil
to meet with Isis, or whatever
the local name of this goddess
was, so that she would
heal you while you
were in that psychic space.
>>NOORY: Here's one that's
a little similar to the one
we just saw.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, it's the same.
Yeah, there's a few of them.
They're found all
over the place.
>>NOORY: This looks more
like a male here, right?
Or maybe not?
>>HATSIS: No, there's--
it does look--
>>NOORY: Looks like a--
>>HATSIS: It has
kind of a male face.
>>NOORY: Looks like a male face.
>>HATSIS: But it does, but
it does also have breasts.
>>NOORY: Why are their
hands up like that?
>>HATSIS: Could be reverential.
We're not sure.
It could just be--
sometimes today we see people
go like this when somebody
says something really--
>>NOORY: I give up.
>>HATSIS: [LAUGHS] Oh, yeah.
>>NOORY: And what
are we looking here?
We're having serpents
all over the place.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
Now, this is a great one.
>>NOORY: This is strange.
>>HATSIS: So this is Persephone
rising from the underworld.
And there's a whole lot of
ancient entheogenic symbolism
in this bas-relief.
You'd mentioned the serpents.
These serpents represent
the underworld, what--
>>NOORY: The underworld.
>>HATSIS: What we today
would call the other world,
the Greeks called
the underworld.
>>NOORY: Hell?
>>HATSIS: Well, hell, that's
Tartarus in ancient Greece.
So there was three levels.
Tartarus would be like our hell.
The Elysian Fields would
be like our heaven.
And the Asphodel Meadows
would be like our purgatory.
So the serpents will take you
to any one of those levels,
of course, based on
how you behave in life.
Now, the opium there, that's the
vector that actually takes you
into the underworld.
And the grain represents your
rebirth, you coming back anew.
So that's what this
symbology here is showing.
This has to do with
the Rites of Eleusis.
>>NOORY: Who is the individual?
>>HATSIS: This is Persephone
rising from the dead.
She is the daughter of
the grain goddess Demeter.
Also would be called the
opium goddess in Greece.
>>NOORY: They worshipped
all these, didn't they?
>>HATSIS: Oh yeah.
>>NOORY: Big time.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, so do I.
>>NOORY: There must have
been something to this.
>>HATSIS: Oh yeah.
Yeah, of course,
because that goes
back to that question
you had asked about,
are these hallucinations?
Or are people really
encountering these beings?
I think, as did
the ancient Greeks,
that they were really
encountering these beings.
>>NOORY: Do you think
these gods that they
talk about, Tom, might
have been extraterrestrial?
>>HATSIS: In some cases,
they could have been.
In fact, a friend of mine is
very fond of eating mushrooms
to actually open up portals
to see UFOs and communicate
with them.
>>NOORY: Does it
work for that person?
>>HATSIS: He says it does.
And actually, my
partner, Eden, who
you'd mentioned
at the beginning,
she's actually done it with him.
And she was pretty taken
aback by what happened.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
She was like, all
the sudden, they're
just flying around in the sky.
And we're both seeing them,
so it's not a hallucination.
>>NOORY: That's interesting.
Let's talk about
Gnosticism a little bit.
And how does that tie into
the entheogenic aspect?
>>HATSIS: Sure.
So Gnosticism is a broad term
covering many different belief
systems in the ancient world.
In the same way, think of
it today, Taco Bell fast--
Taco Bell, McDonald's,
and Wendy's are
all "fast food," right?
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>HATSIS: But they're
all very different.
>>NOORY: But they're
all different.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
Gnosticism is the same way.
Gnostics were more or
less mystical Christians.
So some of them had completely
eschewed all earthly delights--
wine, sex, whatever.
Other Gnostics did not.
They said, no, we
are the divinity,
so we should indulge in that.
And so we have some
pretty good evidence
from mostly their enemies,
the church fathers,
writing about these Gnostic,
saying how, oh, they
think they're having
these experiences,
but they're really drinking
those magic potions
that make them see things.
So famously, Simon Magus--
who might not have actually
existed as a person,
but I think that there
was an archetype there
that it was based off--
I believe it was
Epiphanius who wrote
saying that Simon Magus was
using these potions to dazzle
his initiates so
that they would think
he had these powers over
nature, and then they
would become part
of his congregation.
>>NOORY: Well, it worked
for him, didn't it?
>>HATSIS: It did work for them.
>>NOORY: How about Jesus?
Did Jesus practice any of this?
>>HATSIS: Jesus is a
tough nut to crack,
because there's nothing direct
that would indicate that Jesus
knew of or used any
kind of plant medicine
in the ancient world.
However, there is fantastic
ancillary evidence that
might point in that direction.
So as just one example,
Jesus was a rabbi.
He's referred to as a rabbi over
40 times in the New Testament.
>>NOORY: Oh yeah, absolutely.
>>HATSIS: So in
order to be a rabbi,
he would have to be familiar
with the Old Testament.
Well, in the Old Testament
there is a holy anointing oil,
which I'm sure some
of your viewers
have heard of the
holy anointing oil.
What they might not know
is that that holy anointing
oil featured this plant called
kaneh-bosm, which is cannabis.
>>NOORY: Cannabis, that's right.
>>HATSIS: So Jesus
very well could
have been using cannabis
ointments to heal people.
He also might have been
using mandrake ointments.
>>NOORY: Like CBD, almost.
>>HATSIS: Yes,
exactly, just like CBD.
And there was also mandrake.
Jesus was well known
for casting out
demons in the ancient world.
Well, how did people in the
ancient world cast out demons?
Well, most of the
time, they used
this plant called mandrake,
which is highly psychoactive
and can be used as an entheogen.
The historian Josephus, who
was born only a few years
after Jesus was
executed, references
mandrake as the key way of
casting out demons from people.
And that was one of
Jesus's specialties,
was casting out demons.
And he does, in
the Gospel of Luke,
instruct his disciples to go
out and use these ointments
on the populace to
those who are sick.
So they could have been
innocuous ointments.
But at the same time, it's
not unlikely in those days
that it would have
involved an entheogen.
>>NOORY: Do you think his
followers were higher than
a kite and kind of assumed
he was doing these incredible
things, and maybe he wasn't?
>>HATSIS: No.
I don't know about
his direct followers,
but later Christians
absolutely were.
And we know this from the letter
to the Corinthians from Paul.
He writes to them saying
that some of the richer
Corinthians in the
Christian church
are not waiting for
the lower classes
to get out of work before
going to the celebration.
So they were drinking
all the Eucharist
and eating all the
wafers and everything.
And Paul says, you
can't be doing that.
Some of you are becoming weak,
ill, or dying from doing that.
Wait, what?
Weak, ill, or dying?
What the heck was in
that Eucharist that's
causing this kind of reaction?
Well, opium will
certainly do that.
Cannabis won't do it.
Mandrake will do it.
Mushrooms won't do it.
But what was in there
that would cause this?
He wasn't talking about
regular wine, like you and I,
we have a great interview.
We go get a bottle
of wine and split it.
He wasn't talking about that.
He was talking about
a reverential wine
that was usually mixed
with these different kinds
of additives.
Especially for the
Corinthians, there
was an area in their
town known as Mecone,
which means opium village.
And that's where so
much of the opium--
>>NOORY: My gosh.
>>HATSIS: --from
Greece came from.
So it was most likely opium--
>>NOORY: How did they
know these things, Tom?
How did they know what to
use and what not to use?
>>HATSIS: Trial and error.
And a lot of the
times, this stuff
was all tested on prisoners.
That's really--
>>NOORY: Of the era?
>>HATSIS: Yeah, yeah.
Prisoners, slaves, they just--
>>NOORY: And if they
died, they died, right?
>>HATSIS: If they
died, they died.
And if they came back
saying, we are all one,
they're like, oh, let's
see what this one does.
>>NOORY: This
psychedelic doesn't work.
Throw it out.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, exactly.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
Dr. John Rush appeared
on a Gaia program
with Regina Meredith about
historical paintings, which
are very fascinating.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
So let's go back now
into the mushrooms
in Christian art.
And I saw your lecture.
I attended one of your college
lectures about two months ago.
And I was very
curious about this.
But I had to say,
it was really kind
of jaw dropping to
see something in some
of those plates so obvious.
And yet at the
same time, it's not
anything I would
have questioned had I
seen it before understanding
this particular topic.
I wouldn't question
why mushrooms pop up
around the base of Jesus's
or Moses or whomever's robes.
And in church art in general,
even in stained glass,
having mushrooms pop up in
a scene, we don't even--
I've never questioned
why mushrooms are there.
>>JOHN RUSH: Well,
you don't expect it.
When you go into these
basilicas, cathedral--
St. Mark's Basilica,
it's so busy
that you wouldn't
know what to look for.
Not only that, when you go into
St. Mark's, you're like cattle.
They kind of troop you through--
>>REGINA: That's true.
>>RUSH: --and get out and
bring in the next group.
And so you don't really
have an awful lot of time
to look at it.
Well, I took pictures.
So when I got back to California
after doing research here,
there, and everywhere, I
started looking at these images
and blowing them up and
taking a close look.
But the starting point for all
of this, the starting point
really is John Allegro
in his book, "The Sacred
Mushroom and the Cross,"
which came out in 1970.
I was a graduate
student at the time.
I didn't exactly know
what to think about it,
but I kept my eyes
open for these things.
He had one picture
in the book, which
could be easily
discredited in the sense
that they could say, oh, it's
pagan art that just happened
to be left there because no
one wanted to destroy it,
or whatever it was.
But when I walked into
St. Mark's Basilica,
and I saw Jesus
with the mushroom
in his hand surrounded
by mushrooms, my god.
I had to--
>>REGINA: You can't ignore that.
>>RUSH: I couldn't ignore it.
And so beginning
in 2001, up until--
well, I guess the book
went into publication--
the first one, the
"Failed God" book
went into publication in 2008.
I've collected
thousands of images.
And not only that,
I have friends
who have hundreds and
hundreds of images.
And we're not--
they're not duplicates.
So they're probably,
in all, at least--
with some of my
friends, we've probably
got 4,000 images of this.
These need to be explained.
Now, my explanation
may not be correct.
But we need to explain
why the mushroom is there,
because it's been ignored
by the art historians
for one reason or another,
either political correctness
or fear of losing their
academic standing.
I can't say.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: What do
you think of that?
>>HATSIS: Well, I'm the worst
enemy of the holy mushroom
conspiracy theory.
>>NOORY: You are.
>>HATSIS: I don't buy
any of what he just said.
I was actually literally
debunking everything
as he was saying in my head.
>>NOORY: Is that his
interpretation, or what got him
to that point, do you think?
>>HATSIS: What got
him to that point
is an inability to read
medieval languages like Latin,
Old German, Old
Spanish, Old Italian.
So I went back.
Those images that
he's talking about,
I could tell you what every
single one of them is.
And none of them are
actually mushrooms.
They're really oddly
designed trees,
but you could actually trace the
pedigree from the ancient world
up until medieval times.
Most medieval copyists
weren't working from nature.
They just worked off
of earlier books.
So you could actually trace
how these so-called "mushroom
trees," as they call them, took
on the shape that they did.
One of the biggest problems
that John Rush and anybody
that supports this idea has
is that there's literally
no record of this anywhere.
So they have a big problem here.
If you're going to-- if he's
going to say there are 4,000
images, but not
one written text,
that is a complete
disconnection for how history--
>>NOORY: It should
balance, shouldn't it?
>>HATSIS: There should
be a balance there,
and there's no balance at all.
I don't know a single
New Testament historian
that takes this seriously.
I don't know a
single art historian
that takes this seriously.
It's a small cadre of kind
of conspiracy theorists
that take it seriously,
but nobody else does.
>>NOORY: Where do you
think he was going,
Tom, with this theory of all
these mushrooms and things
like that?
>>HATSIS: Well, I've
actually read his books.
I know his work pretty well.
He believes that Jesus
was really just a mushroom
experience, that there wasn't
actually a historical Jesus.
>>NOORY: Oh my gosh.
>>HATSIS: And that the--
>>NOORY: Don't say
that the Christians.
>>HATSIS: Well, the good
news for the Christians
is, whether you're a Christian
or not, it's just not true.
Most historians would agree
that there was probably
somebody named Jesus
walking around at that time.
>>NOORY: Who did things--
>>HATSIS: Who did things that
definitely annoyed the Roman
guard, because you
have pagan authors who
write about his execution.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>HATSIS: So there's
something there.
And there's just too
much of a disconnect.
And when I read his books,
his book, "The Mushroom
in Christian Art,"
he makes a lot
of very compelling
arguments, but he
doesn't cite any of them.
And just being a
historian and dealing
with medieval studies for
the better part of 15 years
or so, it's just-- it's really
easy to kind of read and say
that this is bunk
in the same way
if somebody tried to offer
me a copy of Cinderella,
then tell me it's
real, well, I know
that pumpkins don't grow that
big and turn into stagecoaches.
So it's really-- it's kind
of the same with them.
They're attractive books,
though, and it's intriguing.
And I used to believe all of it.
But part of--
>>NOORY: Do you think he
believes what he wrote?
>>HATSIS: I don't know.
I don't actually know
if what they believe,
or what they don't believe--
I like to give him the
benefit of the doubt.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>HATSIS: I don't
think he's dishonest.
I think that it's more probable
that he really believes this
and just completely lacks--
>>NOORY: It's his
interpretation.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, he just doesn't
have the training to actually
interpret those images
in a way that scholars
would take seriously.
>>NOORY: Tell me
about medieval magic
and how that fits
into the equation.
>>HATSIS: Sure.
So one of the things we do know
about from medieval times--
and this actually ties into how
we know this is probably not
accurate-- is that medieval
Christians wrote openly
about their entheogenic use.
They wrote about using cannabis.
They wrote about using opium.
They wrote about using mandrake.
They wrote about using henbane.
But they didn't
mention the mushroom?
That doesn't make
any sense at all.
One text in particular known as
the Trudperter Hohelied which
just means the
Trudpert Song of Songs,
is very intriguing
because it paints mandrake
with entheogenic
Christian symbolism.
I actually have part
of it memorized.
It says, "The bark of
mandrake brings intoxication.
This root denotes
God, the image of whom
is Christ, for He is a
medicine and a security
for eternal life.
The root's bark is the Holy
Ghost, and He," meaning Jesus,
"is the numbing
vapor that you feel
after drinking the mandrake."
So here we have highly
entheogenic Christian symbolism
built into this, and yet
there's no mention of a mushroom
anywhere.
>>NOORY: That makes
you wonder, doesn't it?
>>HATSIS: Not me.
[LAUGHS] I think it's really--
>>NOORY: Not you.
>>HATSIS: I think it's all
pretty straightforward that
Christians--
and they could have been
using mushrooms, of course.
I don't deny that.
I just deny that they were
secretly hiding in an art
because there's no reason
to secretly hide it in art.
There wasn't a war on drugs yet.
There wasn't Nancy Reagan yet.
There wasn't "Reefer
Madness" yet.
There was no reason
to cover this up.
And again, they wrote open--
Theodoret was a bishop of
Syria who wrote openly, yeah,
I like to smoke opium
and read from the Gospels
to look for the hidden meanings.
It's like, so why not
write about mushrooms too?
>>NOORY: What was
the true purpose
of alchemists of that era?
>>HATSIS: So the true
purpose of alchemy
was the idea to uncover the
hidden pathway of evolution,
really.
Alchemists famously tried
to turn led into gold.
We've all heard of this.
But why were they trying
to turn lead into gold?
Because according to alchemists,
gold was just highly evolved
led.
All gold started as led, then
became copper, then became
silver, then became gold.
Now, this worked for the
alchemists themselves.
They were Neoplatonists,
meaning that they
believed in a hierarchy
of angelic beings.
And by discovering the right
formulas and potions to drink,
they could attain or
get to that next level
in their own evolution.
And this could involve
things like mushroom use.
A colleague of mine,
PD Newman, just
released an article
about mushroom use
in alchemy treatises.
So they were familiar with them.
And one treatise in particular--
the thing about alchemy, it's
hard because they colored--
how can I put this?
Alchemists were very
secretive because we're
talking about things like
turning lead into gold
or achieving immortality.
This is powerful stuff.
>>NOORY: They protected
the things they did.
>>HATSIS: They did.
And so they did it through
kind of mystical poetry.
So as one example, one
book, the book of Ripley,
writes about a toad he
saw drunk red off wine.
Well, he probably is
referring to a mushroom,
because he calls it a medicine
that can heal and kill.
We also know that toads
have a long association
with the Amanita muscaria, i.e.
the toad stool.
So a toad drunk
red on wine, that--
I think he's-- that Ripley was
referring to a mushroom there.
>>NOORY: Does the King
James Bible make reference
to some of these things too?
>>HATSIS: Yes, in
the areas where
they talk about kaneh-bosm.
The only problem is, so
during King James's time,
I had mentioned
earlier kaneh-bosm was
the Hebrew word for cannabis.
So when the Greeks in the third
century before the common era
were writing the
Septuagint, which
is the Greek version
of the Old Testament,
there was a mishap
with the translation,
and kaneh-bosm was
translated as calamus, which
is a marshy, reedlike plant.
And so when King James
was writing his Bible,
he used that--
earlier translations that
actually said calamus.
So he never actually
wrote kaneh-bosm,
which would be cannabis.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
Jason Louv discussed a little
bit about this magical thinking
on Open Minds.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: And
so at the same time,
when you look at
bacon, for example,
what an incredible mind
many think to be the actual,
at least part of, or if not,
the better part of a body
of Shakespeare's work,
authorship of that--
I think that's, in the
intelligentsia circles,
is kind of accepted-- but
then also under contract
to rewrite the King James
version of the Bible.
And again, how did
you perceive that part
of his role in the world,
to rewrite the Bible
into this everlasting, at least
the last few years, King James
version of the Bible?
>>JASON LOUV: Well, it's
a fascinating question.
And there was so much
going on at this time.
Those guys, both Bacon,
Shakespeare, John D-- yeah,
of course they were
all working together.
There was a lot going on
behind the scenes that is--
some of which is historically
accepted and some of which
is conjecture.
But it's just very clear to
me, observing that period
in history, that there
was a group of very, very
intelligent people, a real
intelligencia, who were working
with everything they had to
modernize Europe and bring
new ideas of spirituality and
scientific advance and world
exploration and art and drama,
in the case of Shakespeare,
and then yes, the
modernization of the Bible.
And the fascinating
thing about all these
is the real common
thread with all of them
is the faith in the
liberation of human beings
from superstition and control,
the idea that human beings
should be free to
pursue happiness,
to pursue scientific truth,
to pursue religious truth
on their own terms.
Those are the ideas
that became America.
All of these things
were manifested finally
as the United States, which
was a project of these guys,
including Francis Bacon.
>>REGINA: The "New Atlantis."
>>LOUV: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And it's
interesting, because again,
when we go into these layers--
and we'll wrap it up on Bacon
in a second in the King James
version--
here you have this--
again, this has withstood
some test of time, of the--
last I read that there were
26,000 versions of the New
Testament alone that exist.
But in this particular
one, the dominant one,
it's used almost in a
fundamentalist way because
of our lack of
nuance in thinking.
But if you look at it from an
intelligence point of view,
it's said to be written
in layers of understanding
for those with eyes to
see that it actually
had quite a lot of these
Renaissance understandings
of magic, science,
and life embedded
in the actual text of the King
James version of the Bible,
if you can see it
and see the patterns.
>>LOUV: Absolutely.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: How important
was that, Tom?
Did people follow these
bibles in these scenes?
>>HATSIS: Some people did,
and some people didn't.
There was also a lot of
backlash against the church
during medieval times.
It doesn't get a lot of press.
But we know about many different
heretical sects, sometimes,
that came up.
Those were people that
were essentially protesting
this kind of stuff, protesting
where the Bible was going,
where Christianity was going.
>>NOORY: They were like heretics
in those days, weren't they?
>>HATSIS: Yes.
They were-- which just means
other than straight thinking.
There's orthodox
and heterodox, which
the-- we like to
say in the field,
the difference between
heterodoxy and orthodoxy
is that orthodoxy is my doxy.
Heterodoxy is your doxy.
>>NOORY: Did they practice
witchcraft in those days too?
>>HATSIS: Yeah, absolutely.
>>NOORY: Under the guise
of Christianity, or--
>>HATSIS: Some people, yeah,
did absolutely mix Christianity
with pagan traditions.
That happened quite a lot.
In fact, I was hard
pressed to find
a case, when I was
writing "The Witch's
Ointment," for a wise
woman who didn't have
some kind of Christian lore
wrapped up in her own folk
beliefs and her own folk magic.
>>NOORY: Was it
dangerous for them
to practice this in this era?
>>HATSIS: Oh yes.
>>NOORY: That's what I thought.
>>HATSIS: Absolutely,
yeah, yeah, absolutely
dangerous to practice,
especially by the time
King James was writing, I
believe the early 1600s.
That's where the wheels
of the witch hunts
were really at their strongest,
was between, I would say,
1550 to 1650.
>>NOORY: You could find
yourself killed with this.
>>HATSIS: I would have been
first at the stake being
burned in those days.
>>NOORY: They would
have gotten you, right?
>>HATSIS: Because I play Derby,
I could maybe outrun them,
but they'd--
>>NOORY: They'd
catch you eventually.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, eventually
they'd catch me.
>>NOORY: Let's jump
ahead to today.
Are these modern issues
being used today, plants
and psychedelics and
things like that?
>>HATSIS: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: Still?
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
>>NOORY: In what way?
>>HATSIS: Absolutely.
So I had mentioned
earlier a friend of mine
who eats mushrooms to open
up portals to communicate
with extraterrestrials.
So that's one way people do it.
In Portland, where
I'm from, there
is a person named Pa Dammit who
runs what he calls the Shamanic
Cabaret, where it's the six-hour
show of Joseph Campbell's hero
journey.
>>NOORY: Six hours?
>>HATSIS: Six-hour rock
concert that this guy
puts on by himself to
kind of guide people
through an entheogenic
experience with a backdrop
of the hero's journey.
>>NOORY: Is it well attended?
>>HATSIS: It is-- yeah,
it's well attended,
and it is just remarkable.
There's also, then, the kind
of weird things that I do,
because I also use these plant
medicines in my practices.
I'm a Gaian worshiper.
Go figure, we're
at Gaia Studios.
But I actually am a
worshiper of Gaia,
she who created the universe.
And I use plant
medicines to be correct--
direct communication with her.
>>NOORY: What has been one
of the strangest experiences
for you, Tom, under
the psychedelics?
>>HATSIS: The strangest.
After my life, it's kind
of nothing's too strange.
But let's see.
A few months ago, when I was
in communication with Gaia,
she was-- we were talking
about strengths and weaknesses
in the individual.
And she was talking
to me about--
she asked me to grab
this, just, object
I was sitting on a table.
And I was like, oh,
well, I'm going for it.
And she said, no.
Use your left hand.
I said, well, I'm right handed.
Well, one's my
non-dominant hand,
and the other's
my dominant hand.
And she said, you're wrong.
You don't have a
non-dominant hand.
And then she literally turned
my left arm into a lion's paw.
So I have a dominant right hand
and a dominant left lion's paw.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
What is microdosing?
>>HATSIS: Microdosing
is the practice
of taking very small amounts
of things like mushrooms or LSD
to get the medical
benefits of it,
which is more energy,
antidepressive effects
that they have as well.
>>NOORY: Anti-anxiety,
that stuff.
>>HATSIS: Anti-anxiety, yeah.
The list goes on and on.
And so microdosing is just a
way to take these small amounts
that are imperceptible.
When somebody takes
a microdose, you're
not feeling anything at all.
It's just working really beneath
the surface and just kind
of fixing some things.
>>NOORY: Let's look
at microdosing.
>>HATSIS: Sure.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>SUE MORTER: is microdosing?
>>PAUL AUSTIN: So microdosing
is the consumption
of a low dose of a
psychedelic, usually two times
per week for a set
period of time,
like five weeks or 10 weeks.
When I did it, I did
it for seven months.
And the idea is that
it's sub-perceptible.
So you might notice that
there's a slight change in how
you go about your daily life,
but there's no visual changes.
You kind of feel like
everything's just a little
elevated, like everything
sparkles a little bit.
And so basically,
the way microdosing
came about was in
2012, a guy named
Dr. Jim Fadiman published a
book called "The Psychedelic
Explorer's Guide."
And he included a
chapter in there
on microdosing that talked
about the experiences
that people had
with microdosing,
a number of anecdotal reports.
And then in 2015, he was
on a very popular podcast.
And that's when it sort of came
out into the cultural sphere,
and you had everyone in Silicon
Valley, tech executives,
founders who
started to microdose
to help with productivity and
creativity, things like that.
>>SUE: how does that
microdose experience
differ from the high dose
experience for the individual?
>>AUSTIN: So the
best way to explain
the difference between a
microdose and a high dose
is with a high dose, it's like
someone is screaming at you.
They're shaking at you to get
the message of connection,
of source.
And that can be very
jarring for people at times
because it's like a
180 from everyday life.
Whereas with microdosing,
it's like someone
is whispering at you.
And it's soft, and it's calm,
and you can integrate it
on an ongoing basis.
I like to compare microdosing
to mindfulness meditation.
People are noticing
very similar effects
when they meditate consistently
as when they microdose.
And so that's
really the best way
to describe the differences
between the two.
>>SUE: And then inside that
microdosing experience,
what are people
subjectively reporting
what happens inside
of them for that?
>>AUSTIN: So the core
thing to pay attention
to when people
are microdosing is
they have enhanced
sense of presence.
So there's less of a
fixation on the past.
There's less of a fixation
on the future, both of which
are tied to either
depression in the past
or anxiety in the future.
And there's more of an
ability just to be here now,
to be present with
everything that's going on.
And again, that's
why so many people
are microdosing with things
like meditation or yoga,
because those practices
when combined can really
help to maintain that
sense of presence.
Now, when we scope,
kind of zoom outside
of that, microdosing
people are microdosing
to help with depression.
They're microdosing
to help with PTSD.
They're microdosing to help with
high levels of social anxiety,
for example.
And then you also
have people who
are microdosing to
help with creativity,
to help with leadership,
to help with productivity.
And essentially, when
you're microdosing,
it's just a little
bit easier to access
what we call a flow state.
And so kind of a flow state
is when you get in the zone.
You're able to just drop
into what you're doing
and just to be there with
it and to go into it.
And that's when creativity
and productivity combine,
and we're able to really
focus on the project
at hand to be able to do
it as well as possible.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: That's Paul
Austin, a friend of yours
who talks very similarly
to what you've been saying.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, yeah.
He's really been the
champion of microdosing.
I would say that he
mentioned Paul Fadiman.
Paul Fadiman threw that ball.
Paul Austin caught
it, and he's been
running with it ever since.
>>NOORY: Tom, why
does there appear
to be a taboo that
encompasses psychedelics?
>>HATSIS: Mostly--
and I hope I don't
upset too many of your
viewers when I say this--
but mostly, it has
to do with the 1960s.
The 1960s was actually the only
time in all of human history
that these medicines were
not revered for the medicines
that they are.
And people weren't using them
in reverential, spiritual
contexts.
They weren't trying to get
in touch with Gaia or Jesus,
if that's your thing.
They were using it as a
party drug and realizing--
>>NOORY: To get high.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, to get high.
And it's like, acid,
LSD, that's not beer.
And if you think you can just go
to a house party and take acid
the way you'd fill
up a beer at a keg--
and people are having
really bad reactions.
It's endangering.
>>NOORY: These are jumping
out of buildings sometimes,
in some cases.
That happened.
>>HATSIS: Only Ralph Metzner did
that, from what I understand.
>>NOORY: The CIA guy, right?
>>HATSIS: Oh no,
that was Frank Olson.
>>NOORY: You remember that?
>>HATSIS: He was
pushed out, I think.
I'm one of those guys.
I think Frank Olson was
pushed out of that window.
But so unfortunately,
what happened
is you have mass media.
You also had the mass
production of television.
So what happened was
America's first real look
at these substances, at
these plant medicines,
was in a highly biased media
controlled kind of way.
And everybody today-- Paul
Austin, myself, Martin Ball,
who you've interviewed as well--
we're all working
double time to try
to show that, no, these
are actually really--
I think mystical experiences
are good for people.
I think they are.
And I think that you're missing
out if you're not having one.
And I don't even mean just
by using psychedelics.
I mean just having--
a naturally occurring
mystical appearance
is great for a person.
But all of that mysticism
and that ideology
got wrapped up in psychedelia.
So then people looked at
even that kind of stuff
like, oh, that's
woo woo or whatever.
And it's like no, there's
actually a lot to it.
>>NOORY: Would you
recommend that people
get in touch with that outside
world through psychedelics?
>>HATSIS: I don't recommend
anybody ever take psychedelics
at all.
>>NOORY: You do not.
>>HATSIS: No.
But if you're going to, yes,
try to have a reverential
experience.
I say prayers
before I take mine.
There's incense that I light.
It's a whole thing that I do
before I eat my mushrooms.
But I think that they're--
as long as people know what
they're doing, they're
educated on the topic,
they don't have a history
of mental illness either
in themselves or their family,
they have a friend that's right
there with them that can
help, that perhaps has had
experiences before--
I'm just trying to
keep us out of trouble
by saying no, don't eat any.
>>NOORY: And what about a
person who's got schizophrenia?
Should he use these?
>>HATSIS: I don't think so.
I don't think so at all.
>>NOORY: That's good advice.
>>HATSIS: I think even somebody
with mild schizophrenia or--
it's one of those, talk
to your doctor about it.
See, that's one of the problems
with all the restrictions in--
>>NOORY: Hey doc, I want to eat
these psychedelic mushrooms.
But a doctor will say no.
>>HATSIS: Not always.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>HATSIS: There's a
whole underground world
of doctors out in America
and Canada and Mexico that--
and in Europe, all over
the place-- that are,
they're psychedelic
psychotherapists.
>>NOORY: What's
your website, Tom,
for people who might want
to track you and follow you?
>>HATSIS: Sure.
So if they're interested
in the psychedelic library,
which is the biggest repository
of psychedelic literature,
that's psanctum.com,
but psanctum with a P.
>>NOORY: With a P.
>>HATSIS: And my
work can be found
at PsychedelicHistorian.com.
That's where the books I write
and upcoming events, things
like that, will be,
articles I've written.
But most of that
stuff is eventually
going to be moved over
to the Psanctum website.
So in like a month or so,
that's going to be the only one.
>>NOORY: Tom, thanks for
being on Beyond Belief.
>>HATSIS: Thank you
so much, George.
This was amazing.
>>NOORY: I learned
a lot from this.
I always thought psychedelics
were totally bad.
Just talking to you,
they really aren't.
>>HATSIS: No they're not.
They're like any other tool.
You could use a hammer to
build a nice table for someone,
or you could clock them
over the head with it.
>>NOORY: Does it get
us closer to God?
>>HATSIS: I would say it gets
us closer to Gaia, but yes.
I think it does.
And I think that for
thousands of years,
people have been
using these medicines
to get themselves closer
to that divine being,
whatever we want to call it.
>>NOORY: There's an old saying.
Kids, don't do this at home.
But as you listen to
Tom Hatsis, there's
an amazing world out
there through the world
of psychedelics.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]